Update hudl_sql_style_guide.md (#15)
hudl/data-docs: style/hudl_sql_style_guide.md

---

# Purpose
This document exists as a resource of guiding principles for those who build, refactor and work with data models. It contains Decision Science’s requirements and best practices for data modeling, SQL style and data testing.

# Principles
* We take a disciplined and practical approach to writing code
* We regularly check-in code to Github
* We believe consistency in style is very important

> * We demonstrate intent explicitly in code, via clear structure and comments where needed

Reviewer: We should choose brief but descriptive name for all objects we create (i.e. schemas, facts, dimensions, intermediate models, CTEs, calculated columns, etc.).

Reviewer 2: I haven't seen anything around adding column descriptions in the global or local files. We have a few models that have the field descriptions in dbt and it helps with naming consistency.

---

# Purpose
This document exists as a resource of guiding principles for those who build, refactor and work with data models. It contains Decision Science’s requirements and best practices for data modeling, SQL style and data testing.

# Principles
* We take a disciplined and practical approach to writing code
* We regularly check-in code to Github
* We believe consistency in style is very important
* We demonstrate intent explicitly in code, via clear structure and comments where needed

> * We value DRY (do not repeat yourself) code and readability, but will favor readability over DRY when the two are in conflict

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I know how to reconcile these two ideas

Reviewer: I agree with Tyler and I added a comment above about descriptive naming. Part of making DRY code readable is naming the reusable components in a more descriptive manner.

* We believe everyone is responsible for code and modeling quality

## Data Modeling
### Data Modeling: The process of using business logic to aggregate or otherwise transform raw data
### Data Model: A structure that organizes and standardizes data elements and how they relate to each other and a real-world entity or concept. In our case, a data model is a standardized representation of a business entity or concept. 

> When it has been determined that a new data model is required to be built, the person building the new model will be required to hold a data model design review. This is a process in which the builder of the data model will write-up their design plans and hold a meeting for these plans to be peer reviewed. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When it has been determined that a new data model is required, the person building the new model will be required to hold a data model design review. This is a process in which the builder of the data model will write-up their design plans and hold a meeting for these plans to be peer reviewed. 
```

The purpose of this is not to block or slow work. Rather, this is a means to ensure data quality, prevent painful re-work and identify dependencies that may have been overlooked. Each data model design will require the following:

* __State the purpose__: 
    Every new data model that is introduced must have a clear purpose linked to business value. All models added should be done so with a high amount of rigor to       ensure data quality.
* __Start With the End in Mind__: 
    Test Driven Development https://www.guru99.com/test-driven-development.html is when the tests are written before the code. While we don’t require a full set of     all tests in the Data Model Design process, an overview of test cases that will be considered and implemented should be included as a part of the data model       design review.

> * __Identify the Grains__: 

Reviewer 3: I would maybe move this above the test section

    Identify what the grains will be of the final table and of any tables from which you will be creating your final table.
* Sample of table output with examples (can be hypothetical)
* Column names and descriptions defined 

### File Orgainzation

> * __Business-centric__ models and __source-centric__ models should be organizationally distinct. __Business-centric__ models define business logic. __Source-centric__ models select from dbt sources and their primary function is to clean and group like-data (ie: payment data may come from two different sources, but need to be joined).

Reviewer 3: `Source` in dbt could refer to actual sources. Based on the description, I'm not sure if that's entirely what you're describing here. The example of payments data could be more of an intermediate model.

  __Business-centric__ models should be created within the marts directory. __Source-centric__ models should be created within the staging directory. 

> Many pre-existing business-centric models do not exist within the marts directory.
            However, all new ones should be created there.

* Define raw data as dbt sources: No raw data sources should be referenced other than in sources. If a source and staging layer do not exist for a model you want to build, you are required to build the needed sources and staging layers.
* __Staging__ 
  - Used to clean sources
  - Rename and Recast fields in this layer
  - There should only be one staging file per one source. Only seed files should be joined at this layer if necessary.
  - No business metrics/values should be created at this layer

* __dbt seed__
  - All seed files belong in the `data` directory.
  - Seed files are best used for mappings (ie. country codes to country names)
* __dbt snapshots__
  - Use to track slowly changing dimensions
  - As a general rule should be built on top of sources
* __dbt macros__

>   - Best for trusted, reusable pieces of logic (ie.fiscal year creation).

Reviewer 3: These are very dbt-centric. Wondering if we want these as part of the modeling best practices as they could change if we were to ever change tools?

### File Materialization
* __Table__
  - Use the table materialization for any models being queried by BI tools (ie. Looker), to give your end user a faster experience
  - Also use the table materialization for any slower transformations that are used by many downstream models

>   - Are fast to query but take a long time to build, especially when they contain complex transformations and or a large amount of data, so keep this in mind when     selecting this materialization

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Are fast to query but take longer to build, especially when they contain complex transformations and or a large amount of data, so keep this in mind when     selecting this materialization
```

* __View__
  - Builds faster, but requires more time for the end user to query. 
  - Is dbt’s default materialization if you do not specify one
  - Generally start with views for your models, and only change to another materialization when you're noticing performance problems.
  - Views are best suited for models that do not do significant transformation, e.g. renaming, recasting columns.

>   - As a general rule, all sources should be materialized as views

Reviewer 3: I _think_ you mean staging models here

```suggestion
  - As a general rule, all staging models should be materialized as views
```

  - As a general rule, you will want the view to be late-binding. This is currently the default in our dbt project and does not need to be specified in every file.     For  more information on why we do this, you can check out this article: https://blog.getdbt.com/using-redshift-s-late-binding-views-with-dbt/

* __Ephemeral__
  - Use for very light-weight transformations that are early on in your DAG

>   - Use when code will be re-used in multiple files to help keep code DRY (do not repeat yourself). However, if this code won’t be re-used, consider making it a       CTE rather than it’s own file.

Reviewer 3: This is defined above
```suggestion
  - Use when code will be re-used in multiple files to help keep code DRY. However, if this code won’t be re-used, consider making it a       CTE rather than it’s own file.
```

>   - Should be used when the piece of logic needs to be referenced in multiple downstream files. 

Reviewer 3: Is this distinct from the bullet above?

Author: no, definitely duplicated. I removed it.

  - This data should not need to be queried by end users and only needs to be referenced for the purposes of data modeling

* __Incremental__

>   - Allows dbt to insert or update records into a table since the last time that dbt was run

Reviewer 3: Technically it's inserting records based on the time frame supplied in the incremental https://github.com/hudl/data-model-transform/blob/9b016dca29900a8b7e6226d4381807ad9b7937df/src/dbt/models/engagement/engagement_19_20/activity/activity_by_day_increment.sql#L69

 
    - Distribute the fact table and one dimension table on their common columns. Your fact table can have only one distribution key. Any tables that join on another     key aren't collocated with the fact table. Choose one dimension to   collocate based on how frequently it is joined and the size of the joining rows. Designate     both the dimension table's primary key and the fact table's corresponding foreign key as the DISTKEY.
    - Choose the largest dimension based on the size of the filtered dataset. Only the rows that are used in the join need to be distributed, so consider the size of     the dataset after filtering, not the size of the table.
    - Choose a column with high cardinality in the filtered result set. If you distribute a sales table on a date column, for example, you should probably get fairly     even data distribution, unless most of your sales are seasonal. However, if you commonly use a range-restricted predicate to filter for a narrow date period,       most of the filtered rows occur on a limited set of slices and the query workload is skewed.

>     - Change some dimension tables to use ALL distribution. If a dimension table cannot be collocated with the fact table or other important joining tables, you can     improve query performance significantly by distributing the entire table to all of the nodes. Using ALL distribution multiplies storage space requirements and     increases load times and maintenance operations, so you should weigh all factors before choosing ALL distribution.

Reviewer 3: I think this section might be too in-depth. I'd perhaps set out the expectation that all tables should have sort and dist styles set, then link to the documentation on different strategies for those.

### Naming Conventions

* Rename and recast fields once. The earlier in the DAG this can be done, the better.

> * Use prefixes in table names (for example, stg_, fct_ and dim_) to indicate which relations should be queried by end users.

Reviewer 3: With staging, we started with using suffixes instead of prefixes. Not saying that's right, but there are a number of staging models already using that style.

  __BAD__:
  `SELECT ksr.backings AS b`

## SQL Style Guide

### General Rules

* No tabs. 2 spaces per indent.
* No trailing whitespace.
* 80 character limit per line
* Include links to hudl id constants or references to important links
* Always use AS when creating aliases for columns, tables, subqueries
* Always capitalize SQL keywords (e.g., `SELECT` or `AS`)
* Always capitalize SQL datatypes (e.g., `VARCHAR` or `DATE`)
* Comments should go near the top of your query, or at least near the closest `SELECT`
* Try to only comment on things that aren't obvious about the query (e.g., why a particular ID is hardcoded, etc.)
* All dates should be formatted as 'YYYY-MM-DD'
* Use `!=` for the inequality operator

### Common Table Expressions (CTEs)

* Use [Common Table Expressions](http://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.4/static/queries-with.html) often, and place them at the top of code

> * CTEs should be used to represent **ALL** table/model references to make code more readable

Reviewer: Any filters specific to one table/model should go into the CTE vs. the main query

> * CTEs should be used to represent **ALL** table/model references to make code more readable

Reviewer: Give CTEs as specific a name as possible
